docs/getting-started/installation.md, before:

# Installation

## Prerequisites

- Python 3.11 or higher
- Claude account with active subscription (Pro, Team, or Enterprise)

## Installation Methods

### Using pipx (Recommended)

The easiest way to install ccproxy is using pipx, which installs it in an isolated environment:

```bash
# Install pipx if you haven't already
python -m pip install --user pipx
python -m pipx ensurepath

# Install ccproxy
pipx install git+https://github.com/CaddyGlow/claude-code-proxy-api.git
```

### From Source (Development)

```bash
git clone https://github.com/CaddyGlow/claude-code-proxy-api.git
cd claude-code-proxy-api

# Using uv (recommended for development)
uv sync

# Or using pip
pip install -e .
```

## Authentication Setup

After installation, you need to authenticate with Claude:

### Initial Login

```bash
# Login to Claude (opens browser)
ccproxy auth login
```

This will open a browser window for Claude authentication. Your credentials are securely stored locally.

### Verify Authentication

```bash
# Check credential status
ccproxy auth validate
```

Example output:
```
             Claude Credentials Validation

                     Credential Status
╭──────────────┬───────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Property     │ Value                                     │
├──────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────┤
│ Status       │ Valid                                     │
│ Subscription │ max                                       │
│ Expires      │ 2025-07-08 17:13:05 UTC (0d 5h remaining) │
│ Scopes       │ user:inference, user:profile              │
╰──────────────┴───────────────────────────────────────────╯
   success   ✓ Valid Claude credentials found
```

### View Credential Details

```bash
# Get detailed information (auto-renews if expired)
ccproxy auth info
```

This displays full credential details and automatically renews the token if expired.

## Configuration

### Option 1: Local Installation

After authentication, test the installation:
ccproxy claude -- /status
```

### Option 2: Docker (Recommended)

Use Docker with included Claude CLI (no local installation needed):

**Volume Configuration:**
- **Claude Home**: `~/.config/cc-proxy/home` (isolated from local Claude config)
- **Working Directory**: Current user path (same as local execution)

**Authentication:**
```bash
# Authenticate Claude in Docker (first time setup)
ccproxy claude --docker -- auth login
```

**Verification:**
```bash
# Test Docker Claude CLI
ccproxy claude --docker -- /status
```

### Expected Output

For both options, `ccproxy claude -- /status` or `ccproxy claude --docker -- /status` should show:

```
Executing: /path/to/claude /status

╭─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ✻ Welcome to Claude Code!                               │
│                                                         │
│   /help for help, /status for your current setup        │
╰─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯

 Claude Code Status v1.0.43

 Account • /login
  L Login Method: Claude Max Account  
  L Organization: your-email@example.com's Organization
  L Email: your-email@example.com

 Model • /model
  L sonnet (claude-sonnet-4-20250514)
```

**This confirms:**
- Claude CLI is properly installed and accessible (local or Docker)
- Your authentication is working
- The proxy can detect and use Claude CLI
- **Docker**: Uses isolated config at `~/.config/cc-proxy/home`

## Quick Start

Run the server:

```bash
claude-code-proxy-api
```

The server will start on `http://localhost:8000` by default.

Commit message:

feat: enhance OpenAI compatibility with thinking blocks and systemd setup
This commit significantly improves the proxy's OpenAI compatibility and adds
comprehensive systemd service management for production deployments.

## OpenAI API Enhancements
- Add support for Claude's thinking blocks in OpenAI streaming responses
- Implement proper thinking_delta handling with visual markers ("[Thinking]")
- Add separator lines between thinking and regular text content
- Fix content block type detection for both standalone and embedded thinking
- Improve streaming response formatting and state management

## Systemd Service Management
- Add interactive setup script for systemd user services
- Create systemd service template with proper environment handling
- Add comprehensive systemd documentation with quick setup guide
- Support automatic service start on user login
- Include service management commands and troubleshooting

## Documentation and Examples
- Add rich CLI client example with streaming support
- Enhance authentication documentation with token storage options
- Update installation guide with systemd setup instructions
- Improve quickstart documentation for better onboarding
- Add detailed examples for both Anthropic and OpenAI API usage

## Infrastructure Improvements
- Add setup.sh script for simplified development environment setup
- Create OpenAI utility module for shared functionality
- Remove deprecated reverse_proxy.py router module
- Update dependencies to include keyring support
- Improve error handling in streaming services

## Bug Fixes
- Fix thinking block detection in content_block_start events
- Correct text block handling when thinking flag is present
- Ensure proper cleanup of thinking state on block transitions
- Fix authentication header handling in request transformers

These changes make the proxy more robust for production use while maintaining
full compatibility with both Anthropic and OpenAI API formats.

docs/getting-started/installation.md, after:

# Installation

## Prerequisites

- Python 3.11 or higher
- Claude account with active subscription (Pro, Team, or Enterprise)

## Installation Methods

### Using pipx (Recommended)

The easiest way to install ccproxy is using pipx, which installs it in an isolated environment:

```bash
# Install pipx if you haven't already
python -m pip install --user pipx
python -m pipx ensurepath

# Install ccproxy
pipx install git+https://github.com/CaddyGlow/claude-code-proxy-api.git
```

### From Source (Development)

```bash
git clone https://github.com/CaddyGlow/claude-code-proxy-api.git
cd claude-code-proxy-api

# Using uv (recommended for development)
uv sync

# Or using pip
pip install -e .
```

## Authentication Setup

After installation, you need to authenticate based on your usage mode:

### Claude CLI Authentication (Claude Code Mode)

For using Claude Code features:

```bash
# Login to Claude CLI (opens browser)
claude /login

# Verify authentication
claude /status
```

**Credential Storage:**
- Stored at: `~/.claude/credentials.json` or `~/.config/claude/credentials.json`
- Managed by Claude CLI directly

### CCProxy Authentication (API Mode)

For using API mode with Anthropic OAuth2:

```bash
# Login to CCProxy (opens browser)
ccproxy auth login
```

This will open a browser window for Anthropic OAuth2 authentication.

**Credential Storage:**
- **Primary**: System keyring (secure, recommended)
- **Fallback**: `~/.config/ccproxy/credentials.json`

### Verify CCProxy Authentication

```bash
# Check credential status
ccproxy auth validate
```

Example output:
```
             Claude Credentials Validation

                     Credential Status
╭──────────────┬───────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Property     │ Value                                     │
├──────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────┤
│ Status       │ Valid                                     │
│ Subscription │ max                                       │
│ Expires      │ 2025-07-08 17:13:05 UTC (0d 5h remaining) │
│ Scopes       │ user:inference, user:profile              │
╰──────────────┴───────────────────────────────────────────╯
   success   ✓ Valid Claude credentials found
```

### View Credential Details

```bash
# Get detailed information (auto-renews if expired)
ccproxy auth info
```

This displays full credential details including storage location and automatically renews the token if expired.

## Configuration

### Option 1: Local Installation

After authentication, test the installation:
ccproxy claude -- /status
```

### Option 2: Docker (Recommended)

Use Docker with included Claude CLI (no local installation needed):

**Volume Configuration:**
- **Claude Home**: `~/.config/cc-proxy/home` (isolated from local Claude config)
- **Working Directory**: Current user path (same as local execution)

**Authentication:**
```bash
# Authenticate Claude in Docker (first time setup)
ccproxy claude --docker -- auth login
```

**Verification:**
```bash
# Test Docker Claude CLI
ccproxy claude --docker -- /status
```

### Expected Output

For both options, `ccproxy claude -- /status` or `ccproxy claude --docker -- /status` should show:

```
Executing: /path/to/claude /status

╭─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ ✻ Welcome to Claude Code!                               │
│                                                         │
│   /help for help, /status for your current setup        │
╰─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯

 Claude Code Status v1.0.43

 Account • /login
  L Login Method: Claude Max Account  
  L Organization: your-email@example.com's Organization
  L Email: your-email@example.com

 Model • /model
  L sonnet (claude-sonnet-4-20250514)
```

**This confirms:**
- Claude CLI is properly installed and accessible (local or Docker)
- Your authentication is working
- The proxy can detect and use Claude CLI
- **Docker**: Uses isolated config at `~/.config/cc-proxy/home`

## Quick Start

Run the server:

```bash
claude-code-proxy-api
```

The server will start on `http://localhost:8000` by default.
