tests/factories/README.md, before:

# FastAPI Factory Pattern Implementation

This document summarizes the FastAPI factory pattern implementation for flexible test app and client creation.

## Implementation

### Core Components

1. **FastAPIAppFactory** (`tests/factories/fastapi_factory.py`)
   - Main factory for creating FastAPI applications
   - Supports composition of settings, dependency overrides, and service mocks
   - Handles authentication setup automatically

2. **FastAPIClientFactory** (`tests/factories/fastapi_factory.py`)
   - Factory for creating both sync and async test clients
   - Works with FastAPIAppFactory to provide complete testing solutions
   - Supports all the same configuration options

3. **AppFactoryConfig** (`tests/factories/fastapi_factory.py`)
   - Configuration class that encapsulates all options
   - Provides type safety and documentation

4. **New Fixture Integration** (`tests/conftest.py`)
   - `fastapi_app_factory`: Main app factory fixture
   - `fastapi_client_factory`: Main client factory fixture
   - `async_client_factory`: Async client factory fixture

### Key Features

- **Type Safety**: Full type hints throughout with no `Any` types
- **Composability**: Mix and match any configuration options
- **Error Handling**: Proper validation and error messages
- **Documentation**: Comprehensive docstrings and usage examples

## Usage Examples

### Basic Usage
```python
def test_basic_functionality(fastapi_client_factory):
    client = fastapi_client_factory.create_client()
    response = client.get("/health")
    assert response.status_code == 200
```

### With Mock Services
```python
def test_with_claude_mock(fastapi_client_factory, mock_claude_service):
    client = fastapi_client_factory.create_client(
        claude_service_mock=mock_claude_service
    )
    response = client.post("/api/v1/chat/completions", json={...})
    assert response.status_code == 200
```

### With Authentication
```python
def test_with_auth(fastapi_client_factory, auth_settings):
    client = fastapi_client_factory.create_client(
        settings=auth_settings,
        auth_enabled=True
    )
    headers = {"Authorization": "Bearer test-token"}
    response = client.post("/api/v1/chat/completions", headers=headers, json={...})
    assert response.status_code == 200
```

### Complex Combinations
```python
def test_complex_scenario(
    fastapi_client_factory,
    auth_settings,
    mock_claude_service
):
    # Combine auth + mock service + custom overrides
    client = fastapi_client_factory.create_client(
        settings=auth_settings,
        claude_service_mock=mock_claude_service,
        auth_enabled=True,
        dependency_overrides={...}
    )
    response = client.post("/api/v1/chat/completions", ...)
    assert response.status_code == 200
```

### Async Clients
```python
@pytest.mark.asyncio
async def test_async_endpoint(fastapi_client_factory, mock_claude_service):
    async with fastapi_client_factory.create_async_client(
        claude_service_mock=mock_claude_service
    ) as client:
        response = await client.post("/api/v1/chat/completions", ...)
        assert response.status_code == 200
```

## Files

### Implementation Files
- `tests/factories/__init__.py` - Module exports
- `tests/factories/fastapi_factory.py` - Core factory implementation
- `tests/factories/README.md` - This summary document
- `tests/unit/services/test_fastapi_factory.py` - Comprehensive test suite

## Testing

The implementation includes comprehensive tests covering:
- Basic factory functionality
- Composition of different configurations
- Async client creation
- Error handling
- Integration with fixtures

## Type Safety

- **mypy compliance**: All code passes strict mypy type checking
- **No Any types**: Proper typing throughout the implementation
- **Type aliases**: Clear type definitions for better readability

## Benefits

1. **Improved Composability**: Mix any configuration options dynamically
2. **Better Test Flexibility**: Configure each test specifically
3. **Reduced Code Duplication**: Single implementation, multiple configurations
4. **Easier Maintenance**: One place to update FastAPI app creation logic
5. **Type Safety**: Proper type hints throughout

The factory pattern provides flexible test app and client creation for the test suite.

Commit message:

refactor: major architecture overhaul for plugin-based system
- Migrate from monolithic to plugin-based architecture
- Consolidate logging configuration into centralized LoggingSettings
- Implement declarative format adapter system with feature flags
- Restructure core services with dependency injection patterns
- Add comprehensive plugin system with runtime discovery
- Introduce OAuth2 framework with provider abstraction
- Establish clean service boundaries and interfaces

tests/factories/README.md, after:

# FastAPI Factory Pattern Implementation

This document summarizes the FastAPI factory pattern implementation for flexible test app and client creation in the streamlined CCProxy test architecture.

## Implementation

### Core Components

1. **FastAPIAppFactory** (`tests/factories/fastapi_factory.py`)
   - Main factory for creating FastAPI applications
   - Supports composition of settings, dependency overrides, and service mocks
   - Handles authentication setup automatically

2. **FastAPIClientFactory** (`tests/factories/fastapi_factory.py`)
   - Factory for creating both sync and async test clients
   - Works with FastAPIAppFactory to provide complete testing solutions
   - Supports all the same configuration options

3. **AppFactoryConfig** (`tests/factories/fastapi_factory.py`)
   - Configuration class that encapsulates all options
   - Provides type safety and documentation

4. **New Fixture Integration** (`tests/conftest.py`)
   - `fastapi_app_factory`: Main app factory fixture
   - `fastapi_client_factory`: Main client factory fixture
   - `async_client_factory`: Async client factory fixture

### Key Features

- **Type Safety**: Full type hints throughout with no `Any` types
- **Composability**: Mix and match any configuration options
- **Error Handling**: Proper validation and error messages
- **Documentation**: Comprehensive docstrings and usage examples

## Usage Examples

### Basic Usage
```python
def test_basic_functionality(fastapi_client_factory):
    client = fastapi_client_factory.create_client()
    response = client.get("/health")
    assert response.status_code == 200
```

### With Mock Services
```python
def test_with_claude_mock(fastapi_client_factory, mock_claude_service):
    client = fastapi_client_factory.create_client(
        claude_service_mock=mock_claude_service
    )
    response = client.post("/api/v1/chat/completions", json={...})
    assert response.status_code == 200
```

### With Authentication
```python
def test_with_auth(fastapi_client_factory, auth_settings):
    client = fastapi_client_factory.create_client(
        settings=auth_settings,
        auth_enabled=True
    )
    headers = {"Authorization": "Bearer test-token"}
    response = client.post("/api/v1/chat/completions", headers=headers, json={...})
    assert response.status_code == 200
```

### Complex Combinations
```python
def test_complex_scenario(
    fastapi_client_factory,
    auth_settings,
    mock_claude_service
):
    # Combine auth + mock service + custom overrides
    client = fastapi_client_factory.create_client(
        settings=auth_settings,
        claude_service_mock=mock_claude_service,
        auth_enabled=True,
        dependency_overrides={...}
    )
    response = client.post("/api/v1/chat/completions", ...)
    assert response.status_code == 200
```

### Async Clients
```python
@pytest.mark.asyncio
async def test_async_endpoint(fastapi_client_factory, mock_claude_service):
    async with fastapi_client_factory.create_async_client(
        claude_service_mock=mock_claude_service
    ) as client:
        response = await client.post("/api/v1/chat/completions", ...)
        assert response.status_code == 200
```

## Files

### Implementation Files
- `tests/factories/__init__.py` - Module exports
- `tests/factories/fastapi_factory.py` - Core factory implementation
- `tests/factories/README.md` - This summary document
- `tests/unit/services/test_fastapi_factory.py` - Comprehensive test suite

## Testing

The implementation includes comprehensive tests covering:
- Basic factory functionality
- Composition of different configurations
- Async client creation
- Error handling
- Integration with fixtures

## Type Safety

- **mypy compliance**: All code passes strict mypy type checking
- **No Any types**: Proper typing throughout the implementation
- **Type aliases**: Clear type definitions for better readability

## Benefits

1. **Improved Composability**: Mix any configuration options dynamically
2. **Better Test Flexibility**: Configure each test specifically
3. **Reduced Code Duplication**: Single implementation, multiple configurations
4. **Easier Maintenance**: One place to update FastAPI app creation logic
5. **Type Safety**: Proper type hints throughout
6. **Streamlined Architecture**: Eliminates combinatorial explosion in test fixtures

The factory pattern provides flexible test app and client creation for the streamlined test suite, supporting the clean boundaries principle with minimal mocking.
